this is a short video called tracking
the pup and it's all about the star
Sirius the dog star the brightest star
in the night sky you can see the little
star up over to the right there showing
serious as the brightest star in Canis
Major the big dog it's just to the
bottom left-hand corner of Orion now
Sirius is the brightest star in the sky
apart from the Sun not because it's
especially powerful but because it's one
of the sun's near neighbours it's only
8.6 light-years away and it is gradually
approaching us and increasingly getting
brighter as it does so but it's going to
be a very long time in making any real
difference it's about twice the mass of
the Sun 2.1 times something like that
but the nature of stars is that they're
more massive they are the more power
they put out in a much more than
linearly proportional manner so it's -
in a bit times the mass but it's 25
times the power output and the
temperature of our Sun is 5,800 degrees
and here Sirius is nearly double its at
just under 10,000 degrees Kelvin so it's
a white-hot star and it's quite young I
need two to three hundred million years
old now in 1718 Sir Edmund Halley he of
Comet Fame noticed that Sirius and a
couple of other stars old Oberon
Arcturus we're all moving across the sky
relative to the far distant background
of stars that are so far away that we
can't tell anything about their movement
and of course being nearby that tends to
make that easier and he noticed that
Sirius had moved by half a degree that's
about the same size as the full moon
appears on the sky in 1800 years of
observational data that he was looking
at
100 or so years later Friedrich Bessel
looked at the motion of Sirius this
proper motion across the sky compared to
the background stars and plotted it on
this chart here showing that it was
wobbling backwards and forwards and he
realized that this must be because it
had a companion that was orbiting around
it and in fact a large companion so
massive that they were orbiting their
common center of mass and he could
figure out from the length of the
wobbles that the period was 50 years now
to make a star like Sirius wobble as
much as it was doing this meant that the
companion would really need to be quite
massive indeed and so he wanted to know
why it was not possible to see it why
did not been observed just a few years
later in 1862 Alvin Clarke the famous
telescope maker were testing what was
then the largest telescope in the world
that Dearborne in Chicago the eighteen
point five inch refracting telescope
shown there in the side picture so this
was being used they looked at Sirius as
a nice test target I often do that when
I'm doing observing as well and he
spotted a faint companion just visible
around about magnitude eight point four
which makes it 10 magnitudes less than
the main star the main star comes in at
a magnitude of negative one point four
five so this little companion is now
called Sirius B cereus B next to the
main star the main stars glowing
white-hot they're imaged by the Hubble
Space Telescope and you can just pick
out the little tiny companion there as I
say 10 magnitudes fainter that
corresponds to a factor of 10,000 less
in brightness and indeed we've been able
follow the orbits of Sirius and Sirius B
and they'd all be around their common
center of mass it's very useful when you
can track a companion orbiting our
object because you can use Kepler's laws
of planetary motion even though they're
both stars the laws are the same it's
just the laws of gravity and you can
calculate the masses of the two very
precisely so we know that Sirius A the
bright star is 2.1 solar masses and the
faint companion star is just under one
at naught point nine eight so it's
rather curious that Sirius B is
ninety-eight percent of the mass of the
Sun but it's actually putting out five
hundred times less power and as I said a
magnitude of eight point four fairly
faint not visible to the naked eye even
if Sirius wasn't there the faintest star
that they could I can see is magnitude
six but when they looked at the spectrum
of it and studied it with other
telescopes they worked out that the
temperature of this little star was
twenty-five thousand degrees Kelvin very
hot indeed and so hot that it's actually
able to give off quite a lot of x-rays
the picture on the right is an x-ray
picture you can see that the main star
is giving off some x-rays but the
difference in brightness between the
main star and the small companion Sirius
B is much less and so the Chris and
these types of stars is rather unusual
stars white dwarf stars they're
obviously very small and they here
basically white it to the eye now what
we know about them is that they are
super dense
pack something like the mass of the Sun
in the case of Sirius B naught point
nine eight solar masses into a radius
about the same size as the earth or even
a little bit smaller and that's quite
curious because a million earths would
be needed to fill the volume of the Sun
so on average the white dwarfs are a
million times more dense than the planet
earth is and so you can work out that a
sugar cube would weigh a ton so the
history of the Sirius system Sirius a
and Sirius B is that they're both formed
roughly 250 million years ago and that
Sirius A started as a 2.1 solar mass
star and it remains so it's blue-white
main sequence star which means it's
fusing the element hydrogen the simplest
element into helium inside its core with
an outer temperature about 10,000
degrees Kelvin and it'll probably
continue doing that for another 750
million years before the core hydrogen
aught starts become exhausted but Sirius
B was probably born as the much heavier
star of the two and about five solar
masses it burned through that very
quickly as a hot blue star with an outer
temperature of between 15 and 20,000
degrees and this is because the more
massive a star is albeit it has more
fuel it burns that fuel
disproportionately faster and so after
only a hundred million years Sirius B
ran out of hydrogen in the core
what then follows is a rearrangement and
the
swells up to become a red giant and then
moves on and starts fusing hide helium
in the core to carbon and even to oxygen
but around about a hundred and twenty
million years ago we think that process
came to a stop
wasn't massive enough to do any more
fusion taking the carbon and oxygen on
to the next set of elements which would
be neon and magnesium in the fusion
chain needed to probably have a mess of
eight solar masses in order to generate
the temperatures necessary for that step
and so the star died puffed off its
outer atmosphere creating what's called
a planetary nebula and expanding smoke
ring and probably blew away about four
of the five solar masses in the process
leaving that one solar mass ash pile of
carbon and oxygen which is the dead
nuclear core the white dwarf star that
we see today now if you cast your mind
back and perhaps the age of the
dinosaurs 65 million years or so ago
perhaps longer wouldn't it have been
amazing to see just how bright Sirius
would have been Sirius B would have
far-out Shawn even Sirius a at that time
it would have been a hugely bright star
in the sky then it would have become a
red giant and with that increase in size
comes an increase in power output and it
would have been even brighter so it must
have been truly awesome sight in the sky
back a hundred million two hundred
million years ago
but there is a slight controversy about
this because only in the year ad 140
column e recorded the colors of the
stars and he wrote down that Sirius was
red in color now it's quite curious
could this have been the last stage of
the red giant phase less than two
thousand years ago seems unlikely we
think it would have been a hundred
million years ago that Sirius was going
through the red giant phase but perhaps
this was when the last remains of the
outflow from the star the creating the
planetary nebula would have been seen
maybe there was a glowing gas from smoke
ring around it as the atmosphere of the
star was driven away for the last time
another curious thing about Sirius and
that is the legend of the Dogon people
of West Africa the story goes that this
ancient tribe had tribal stories and
knowledge that they passed on verbally
from generation to generation and they
refer to the existence of Sirius B and
even to its 50-year orbit this was a
real mystery how did these people
possibly know about this
before the actual discovery of it much
later well we think that it might have
been passed to them as it says on the
screen here there was a French
astronomical expedition arrived to
observe an a total eclipse of the Sun in
1893 so maybe that's where the stories
originated but we're still not quite
sure well I thought I'd have a go at
trying to observe Sirius B with my
telescope I've always wondered how
difficult it would be the problem is
that it's very very close to the Sirius
A in the sky is only between 3 and 11
arc seconds away now an arcsecond is a
sixtieth of an arc minute which is a
sixtieth of a degree
and so you can imagine that this is
really a very tiny angle on the sky and
their resolution of typical amateur
telescopes might just about be around
three arc seconds because the
limitations of the turbulence in the
Earth's atmosphere would present such a
limit and the real problem then is with
it so close and with the ten thousand to
one brightness ratio could be quite
difficult but a few years ago now in
2016 I decided that it was worth having
a go and with the help of a another
friend from the Cambridge astronomical
association called Leyland we used my
new 14 inch reflecting telescope and a
deep sky imager camera on it to tried
and do this and here's the results that
we got so on the Left we have an image
where you've got the somewhat
overexposed central image of sirius a
but just sneaking in on the left there
is the little tiny image of the pup
and we can see that the data on the
right has been carved out of that Paul
Leyland did this and split out the
brightness from the central point of
sirius and turned it into a graph so you
can see that the central point was
scoring about 30,000 on the brightness
scale up from the camera and then it
died away more or less in a bell-shaped
curve but there was a lump on the side
if you sliced it in the correct
direction caused by the light from
Sirius B and we're just picking that up
on the edge there as a little extra hump
and indeed that's an angular separation
of around about six or seven arc seconds
away from the central point of sirius a
there
challenged to capture we had to make the
exposure times very very short indeed
each each digital frame that we were
capturing was just five milliseconds
long and the we captured many many
thousands of frames and then took the
best seven hundred and tried to combine
them to make this one image so it's a
real challenge so anyway that's the
street of how we tracked down the the
pup Sirius B the white dwarf star and
was a very interesting and challenging
project so thanks very much do have a
look at my other videos on YouTube and
if you like them click Subscribe and
you'll find out when there are new ones
being posted thank you